transitional radio for planet Earth. You are tuned to KMUD Garberville 91.1 FM KMUE Eureka
88.1 FM KLAI Laytonville 90.3 FM FM translator K258BQ heard at 99.5 on your FM dial in Shelter
Cove and worldwide we are everywhere on the world wide web the information super highway
faster than the speed of sound at KMUD.org the time is seven o'clock you are tuned to ask your
herb doctor support for KMUD comes from listeners like you and from Chautauqua Natural Foods locally
owned for over 25 years they specialize in local and organic produce natural groceries nutritional
supplements and body care products Chautauqua Natural Foods is open Monday through Saturday
from 9 to 7 Sunday from 10 to 5 just off the town square in Garberville and support for KMUD comes
from Midnight Arrow Unlimited anything anywhere anytime Dave Sky A&P at Garberville Airfield the
next voice you hear will be the herb doctor live from Studio B in Redway California
[Music]
Well good evening and welcome to this
month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name is
Andrew Murray. For those of you who
perhaps have never listened to the shows
which run every third Friday of the month
from 7 to 8 p.m. we're both licensed
medical herbalists. We trained and
graduated in England with a master's
degree in herbal medicine and we run a
clinic in Garboville here in California
that has a wide range of conditions and
recommend herbal medicine and dietary
advice. So you're listening to Ask Your
Herb Doctor on KMUD Garboville 91.1 FM
and from 7.30 until the end of the show
at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in
with any questions either related or
unrelated to this month's subject of
thinking outside the box and the
relevance of thinking outside the box is
novel and new approaches to cancer
treatment. Definitely thinking outside
the box rather than a deterministic
viewpoint of killing cancer cells. So
number here if you live in the area is
923 3911 or if you live outside the area
toll free number is 1-800-KMUD-RAD. So
people that listen to the show tonight
who either have or know people who have
diagnosis of cancer could be very
relevant to those people listening and
I'd encourage you to call in with any
questions that you might want to put to
either myself or Dr. Peat about this
month's show. So cancer then has
traditionally been viewed as something
to destroy and to this end the mainstream
of treatment is either what's known as
cytotoxic cell killing drugs which
poison the body or this directed focused
radiation which does no better. It's all
sidle that is it kills the cells
directly and with also the associated
collateral damage and inflammation that
comes from the treatment either
widespread or localized. Now the
evolution of thinkers who challenge
dogma has always hailed new
breakthroughs in our understanding and
novel approaches to cancer treatment are
also making themselves known. The
co-discoverer a Nobel Prize winner James
Watson recently made some observations
regarding cancer in its treatment and
these have again been taken further and
are very much outside the box theory has
emerged and Dr. Peat then he joins us in
a moment here will be asking him for his
his viewpoint on it because he's very
much an outside the box thinker as most
of you perhaps have tuned into him of
recognized. Now most people are under the
mistaken belief and myself included that
antioxidants are always good for you in
the diet the more the better. So but this
is not true and sometimes these very
antioxidants can fuel cancer metabolism.
So again let's have some lateral
thinking here and get our heads around
some of that I know it's going to be a
little bit heavy for some people
perhaps if they're not really science
minded but Dr. Peat will hopefully
outline the questions that I put to him
so far as the physiology and the
chemistry of the what we call the radox
system in the body the reduction
oxidation processes that are so
important and necessary for regular
cell functioning to to occur and then
once we elucidate the radox activity
within the body we can also understand
better some of the novel approaches to
cancer treatment. So what is it what
rather what it is that we thought we
understood about cancer and
antioxidants for example and in what
context then does the latest
understanding shed new light on the
subject. So firstly Dr. Peat thanks so
much for joining us again. Hi Dr. Peat.
Hi I'm here. No problem okay so as always
just to introduce yourself your
professional academic background to give
people who perhaps have never listened
to you before an understanding of where
your research merits are. Okay 1968 I
had been studying more or less
independently biology and a lot of
related fields but 1968 I decided to go
to graduate school for a PhD and
graduated there in 1972 specializing in
reproductive aging and oxidative changes
and it was the oxidative metabolism
that I saw changing with aging which was
really against the grain already at that
time I saw an increase of reductive
activity with aging for example you can
put a dye in young tissue and old tissue
and reductive enzymes fueled by the
energy producing system and the
internal antioxidant system is part of
it. The older tissue reduced the dye
much more energetically looking like it
was more alive for example you can test
the vitality of any tissue by the
intensity of staining of this
tetrazoleum chemical and I found that an
overdose of estrogen or deficiency of
vitamin E or any serious injury such as
x-rays will increase the ability of the
tissue to stain this dye so aging and
these various injuries all increased the
reductive activity of the tissue which
involves what are called the
anti-oxidative enzyme defense systems
and that was what got me interested in
the fact that cancer is very rich in
anti-oxidative defenses not only the
enzymes with a lot of specific chemicals
that will act as antioxidants at that
time people were trying to identify the
specific chemicals that cancers used to
defend themselves against oxidative
poisons the chemotherapy and and
radiation oxidative damage but over the
last 40 years it has developed that it
isn't just a simple chemical that they
produce defensively but the very basic
life processes are shifted in that
direction which increases the reductive
or anti-oxidative staining of this
tetrazoleum and dye just as an indicator
that's easy to see. Okay so what caught
my attention reading some of these
articles recently was that there there's
definitely a new new novel way of
looking at cells I know you've mentioned
this in the past prior to doing this
show which is kind of more based on the
new findings in the the extracellular
matrix as they call it and the fluidity
within which cells are mobile and
constantly in motion I think it was
always posited before that everything
was fairly fixed and once some a cell
had differentiated it couldn't do
anything more its fate was sealed but
actually the new start new theories and
new studies are finding that there's
much more of a kind of quantum quantum
state going on where things are very
fluid and cells very much communicate in
two directions and are subject to and
give instructions to other components
in the body so in terms of in terms of
what they call this extracellular matrix
in which this in which the cells kind of
reside what it what implications does
this has for understanding an approach
to cancer treatment for example. Well
the the rigid doctrine of the organism
that governs current cancer therapy it
really was imposed on a more basic
biological view with it started around
1830 with Johannes Muller in Germany
who described tumors as a problem of
organization not of defective cells and
that approach as it continued through
embryology right through the 1930s and
1940s in which people could dissociate
an embryo or a primitive organism and
show that the cells themselves could
reconstruct the organism after they had
been entirely separated so the the
environment that they live in is
constantly being constructed to meet
their needs the cells have particular
needs and they will change the
environment to meet those needs if they
have the energy and the resources. If
for some reason a cell or an organ
becomes idle it loses its sense of
direction if there's no stimulation and
no energy flowing through the system
the cell doesn't have any particular
occupation or knowledge of what it
should be doing but ordinary cells
everything else being ideal will if
they see a defect in their environment
they will reach out and correct the
defect the extracellular matrix the
main components are collagen for
stiffness rigid linear molecules that
surround each other and in between
those stiff collagen molecules there
are carbohydrate chains polysaccharides
and some with with proteins attached
with some just simple polysaccharides
with amino groups on them that retain
water and create an elastic or springy
environment against the pure hard
environment of the pure collagen system
and cells prefer a certain rigidity of
environment when you take an isolated
cell and put it on a surface that
varies in stiffness the cells will
creep towards the stiffer firmer
footing they don't like squishy things
to sit on and if you inject broken down
collagen fibers into an organism or a
developing embryo the cells will
rearrange the disorganized
collagen that you have given them
they're sort of like bricklayers
align it in the direction they want
and tug on it and communicate partly
just by the way they tug and the other
cells sense the tugging and pull back
and because they have an inherent
knowledge of the structure in which
they should be in yeah and they like a
fairly solid but they can create more
of the polysaccharide so that it holds
more water and is open and able to
diffuse things to feed them so it has
to be just right and there are various
specific proteins that they secrete to
attach themselves to do that pulling
and pushing but there are some proteins
at the surface which happen to be
chemically connected and interactive
with the very structure of the cell all
the way through in a very coherent
unifying way of the sulfur and
sulfhydryl system of the cell is what
gives it much of its toughness and it
has to be constantly broken down and
reformed because the cell inside is
constantly in motion. You're saying
there's a constant connection of
sulfhydryl from the outside of the cell
to the center of the cell? Yeah and about
40 years ago some experimenters found
that if they blocked those surface
sulfur groups the cell couldn't stick
to its environment so the degree of
reduction and oxidation of the surface
sulfur groups is a very big part of how
it sticks to its environment and gets
where it has to be and helps to shape
its environment and that degree of
oxidation is governed by what has been
called the antioxidant defense system.
Okay, all right. You're listening to
Ask Your Ob Doctor on KMED Galbraith 91.1 FM
and from 7.30 until the end of the show
people are invited to call in with any
questions they may have regarding this
month's subject of thinking outside the
box for cancer therapy and Dr. Peat
here in a bit here will get into the
specifics of how reduction oxidation
works in cells and how the new
findings are showing that actually the
concept of antioxidants are not
necessarily positive and how perhaps we
can influence that system to be more
beneficial towards resolving cancers.
Also going to be bringing up a article,
a very interesting article that everyone
can go to the internet and take a look
at written by Mina Bissell on the
programs called TED Talks. Basically
there's a 15-minute talk on the
architecture and context the form and
function of the organization of the cell
and how cancers are viewed in a
different light now and she has some
pretty exciting pretty exciting results.
So Dr. Peat in terms of the we've
mentioned very briefly the reduction
and oxidation of cells or components of
cells or molecules that are part of say
electron transport chain or modifying
chemicals. Can you can you want to
describe this how this potential works
in the matrix and how this can determine
the outcome of disease and health? I
guess from making the simplistic
consumption of antioxidants for example
a bad choice perhaps for cancer strategy.
If you look at the balance between
oxidants and antioxidants or reductants
in the cell many people think of it as a
reducing environment or an
antioxidative environment but when you
look at specific components such as the
the molecule that transfers electrons
from glucose for example to the
mitochondrion to be oxidized. NAD is the
coenzyme and it becomes reduced to NADH
which is the source of the antioxidant
electrons and if you look at the healthy
cell the ratio of the oxidized form is
hundreds of times the reduced form is
about 500 or more times the oxidized
form is 500 times greater than the
reduced form and so that that's the
governing antioxidant. Is the oxidized
form. A highly oxidized state and that is
in balance with ascorbic acid and
coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E and the
sulfur system glutathione and
glutathione disulfide. These are all
energized by the electron from NADH
which comes from glucose normally and so
the cell normally is in this really
highly oxidized state as determined by
the ratio of NAD to NADH and if the
cell is sick for example a cancer cell
the ratio approaches one to one.
It's almost 50% in the reduced
antioxidant state and if you injure a
cell you turn on this signaling system
that James Watson talked about as one of
the problems that he says people are
looking for some way to turn that off so
you don't keep pushing the cell in the
direction of too much reduction but in
fact anything that irritates the cell is
likely to turn on more of the reducing
system and push it in that direction of
stress or cancer with a higher ratio of
NADH to NAD approaching one to one.
You're saying that you want it in a
oxidized form you want the cell not to
have access to antioxidant activity.
Yeah the healthy active cell has about
500 times more oxidized NAD.
When the people who are selling their
very powerful antioxidants a lot of the
advertisements say it's many times more
powerful than vitamin C or than vitamin E
but what they're doing is testing the
antioxidants in vitro in a test tube and
they will attack and destroy the
oxidizing fragments free radicals but it
happens that just like the NAD, NADH
couple which is highly oxidized the
things in balance with that ascorbic
acid and vitamin E for example inside
the cell they become oxidized.
The dehydroascorbic acid is an oxidant
and it's eight times more concentrated
in the cell than outside.
It's relatively hydrophobic and it goes
to the oily parts of the cell.
So that will itself break down an
antioxidant from on the outside of the
cell.
Irritating the cell and turning on the
defensive antioxidant reductive systems
and producing a lot of the fragments
that reduce glutathione, one of the
sulfur molecules that exchanges
throughout the system.
When the cell is irritated that and
the associated ascorbic acid which
becomes reduced and the vitamin E which
becomes reduced these will sop up the
toxic fragments but the trouble is that
the system which normally should be
oxidized all the way through the
ascorbic acid, the vitamin C, vitamin E
coenzyme Q10 and so on.
The whole system gets stuck in an
over reduced, over electrified or not
enough oxidation going on to pull it
back where it should be.
Since the 1930s people have seen that
any cell which is dividing goes into
this highly reduced state in which
everything shifts to the sulfhydryl
rather than the disulfide form.
Okay and this includes the cancer cells
then?
Yeah and normal cells go into this
phase very quickly, divide and then
return to their oxidized state and the
vitamin E and vitamin C go back to
becoming oxidants and keeping the
system tightened up, helping to squeeze
water out of the system and the balance
where the membrane potential of a cell
is normally around 100 millivolts
difference when you measure it with an
electrode stuck into it.
The redox difference is in a range of
about 15 millivolts, a very small
fraction of the energy which is
available for induction.
If you measure the voltage between
glucose and oxygen it's over a volt so
it's about 100 times more than the
difference of 15 millivolts which
governs practically all of the reactions
in the cell.
The enzymes which produce energy,
synthesized protein which govern the
economy of the cell, these are sensitive
to being reduced or oxidized and so
this 15 millivolt difference can shift
the whole economy of the cell.
That's a pretty tight range within
which normality exists.
When you measure the products such as
pyruvic acid versus lactic acid,
these are an excreted or easily
extracted index of the oxidative or
reductive state of the cell.
So when the cell is in trouble it turns
pyruvic acid into lactic acid by
reducing it.
So that's a reflection of the highly
reduced antioxidant state when the cell
is distressed and making lactic acid.
When oxygen is working properly it's
not producing lactic acid,
it's using, consuming the pyruvic acid,
turning it into carbon dioxide.
So the ratio between not only pyruvic
acid and lactic acid but overall it
would be between lactic acid versus
carbon dioxide.
Carbon dioxide is an acid and so in a
sense it's an oxidant.
It causes retraction of electrons.
Because the fundamental here is
basically mopping up electrons.
Yeah.
So, okay, so let me ask you this.
The reactive oxygen species, okay,
so a group of molecules governed
electrically, the antioxidant system
versus the reactive oxygen species
system, in terms of inflammation and
what free radicals, I think as I've
understood free radical damage to be a
result of free radical liberation that
isn't mopped up by antioxidants, is it
almost that free radicals are almost, I
can almost think of free radicals now as
being a little more beneficial than the
antioxidants because they...
That's Watson's interpretation but I
think that's his 50 years as a
reductionist when he comes out of the
static mechanical view of genetics and
looks at the metabolism of the cell, he
tends to over concretize and the
antioxidant system is doing good stuff
defending against toxic free radicals
but the oxidative normal functions
involving ascorbic acid or dehydroascorbate
and vitamin E and the sulfhydryl
balancing system, those are able to
control the system that he suggests the
toxic free radicals would be doing.
So you can get both the good defensive
process against free radicals and the
limiting of the production of more free
radicals without resorting to one of
the toxic chemicals that he's suggesting.
Because you're advocating and I know
you have not just further subject in
hand but in general as a good health
practice from advocating plenty of fruit
consumption for example, you advocate
vitamin C and vitamin E as very safe and
gentle, relatively gentle in their
antioxidant capacity to some of the
products I know that have been mentioned.
You talk about the super antioxidants
that are touted on the supplement market
that people may have consumed or may
have thought were a good thing but in
general vitamin C and vitamin E are very
safe and they do the work very
effectively.
That's because they are electrically
tuned to exactly a certain role or group
of roles in the cell and if you put in
dynamite instead of alcohol you can have
the same overall energy expense but it
isn't under control and some of the
antioxidants that they're selling are
more like dynamite, don't fit into the
system and so they aren't helpful at all.
And when the good antioxidants are
working properly the system can run as
fast as it once practically oxidizing
at full speed and there are examples of
experiments in which as you add thyroid
hormone or a chemical that uncouples the
production of ATP from simply the
burning of oxygen and fuel as you rev up
the oxidizing process you get fewer and
fewer free radical productions.
So, because you normally associate free
radical production with that.
Yeah and so the good antioxidants are
working with the mitochondria and the
faster that system runs the fewer
electrons get away to cause the
dangerous free radicals.
So, this is a bit like the aerobic versus
anaerobic glycolysis and its effects.
Yeah, when the cell gets out of control
oxygen is no longer able to suck up the
electrons and so the cell has to expel
the electrons in the form of lactic acid
and that's a survival mechanism but it
happens that when you do that desperate
production of lactic acid to draw off
excess electrons it happens to raise the
pH inside the cell and lower the pH
outside the cell and I think it was the
embryologist Holtfrater who demonstrated
that if you put an embryo in a slightly
acidified solution the cells simply
leave the embryo and float off and do
their own thing.
So, the cancer or the stress metabolism
acidifying outside the cell is tending
to destroy the cell's connection to its
environment and at the same time raising
the pH inside the cell makes it swell up,
water and shifts the self-hydro balance
into the reduced state and tends to turn
on constant cell diffusion.
Okay, well I guess before we get into the
Danopoulos previous experiments and
research with urea for the treatment of
cancers including liver cancer, I know
that from an oxidant versus antioxidant
perspective that exercise in its own
right then generates sufficient
biological oxidants which could be
perhaps used as a valid approach to
diabetes, cardiovascular disease and
some cancers and I've seen that there is
some research to support that they
exercise especially for diabetes but in
some instances for cardiovascular
disease and cancer is actually fairly
pertinent.
Exercise will cause cells to take up
glucose in the absence of insulin and
will make them operate effectively but
just like the uncoupling protein or the
increased thyroid, these are the cells
equivalent of exercise so that when
everything is working in an organized
way the cells are exercising by simply
burning oxygen and fuel and warming
themselves up so exercise should keep
everything active but when it doesn't
the organism can defend itself and
imitate exercise by running things at a
higher speed.
Okay, all right you're listening to
Ask Your Ob Doctor on KMED Gallup 91.1 FM
from now until the end of the show at
8 o'clock callers are invited to call
in with any questions they have
hopefully surrounding tonight's subject
of novel approaches to cancer so like I
said at the beginning of the show we're
hopefully going to get into a little bit
later on about liver cancer and some of
the work done by a pioneering doctor
back in the 80s which is still relevant
today concerning urea therapy.
The number if you live in the area is
923 3911 or if you live outside the area
there's an 800 number which is 1-800-KMUD-RAD.
Okay so...
Doc, can I just get in there quickly we
got a call since the top of the hour
someone called to say there are two
loose friendly brown and white pitbulls
running loose on Branscom Road between
number 2015 and Laytonville and this
phone call just came in so if those
might be your dogs running loose on
Branscom Road two brown and white
pitbulls folks want you to know they're
out running loose. Thanks.
So Dr. Peat I looked earlier on at that
15-minute, well it wasn't a podcast but
it was a video basically the TED talks that
Meena Bissel presented. It's a very
interesting work that she was doing and
quite amazing where she had shown
that the context and the architecture
of the cell was very much the governing
force behind whether or not cancers
were present and I know from your what
you're mentioning earlier on about the
extracellular matrix of the whole
solution around the cell within the
cells all very fluid the cytoskeleton
this all starts from the outside and
works its way in its constant and the
energy that should be present within a
healthy cell gives the potential to
signal and allow changes to happen so
that everything's ordered. Now what she
was what she was bringing up was I think
she was specializing in breast cancer
and she'd showed that clip during the
15-minute speech that she gave about the
the duct cell one of the duct cells
that secretes milk with a
pre-cancerous stage and then the cancerous
stage and then she basically proved that
it could be the cancerous cell could get
turned back to its normal state not by
poisoning it or radiating it but by
allowing the extracellular matrix in
which it was growing to be normalized
and I know this is an approach that
you're positing now as a novel way of
approaching a disease in general and
not just cancers but other diseases so
that it's more of a functional
disorganization of the environment in
which the cells operate that is the
cause rather than the cells themselves
becoming mutant or aberrant or just
losing their program or whatever is
popular vogue theory for health. The
exercise idea is very relevant to a
breast cancer you've probably heard the
statistics that women who are constantly
having babies and nursing through their
whole fertile years have a very low
risk of breast cancer and so what is
working keeps working and the cells
which are have a load and a job to do
are keeping their extracellular matrix
organized to support what they're
doing. We do have a call in I want to
get this call in very quickly but I do
also want to ask you whether or not how
much credence do you think the high
exposure to progesterone during
pregnancy has on the fact that they
have very low incidence of breast cancer
to do how much of that part do you
think it plays? I think that's the main
thing it erases for example looking at
the connective tissue like like the
tendons which are almost pure
connective tissue if you expose a
rabbit for example to estrogen the
connective tissue such as the tendon
becomes stiff and hardened and every
time it becomes pregnant and the
estrogen goes up you see a shift
momentarily towards hardening but after
each pregnancy it's less hardened than
before and it's the progesterone which
reverses those changes even in the
connective tissue the extracellular
matrix and it's also erasing the
intracellular estrogen functions the
synthesis of estrogen the failure to
detoxify it and the tendency to bind it
all of these are regulated by
progesterone as an anti-estrogen. Good
okay well let's get this caller then and
see see where this callers questions
going. Hi caller you're on the air and
where you from? Hi Dr. Peat and Andrew
you and I have spoken over computer
stuff and my question is I was born with
some interesting genetics and I've
always wondered how it happened that I
was born from two eggs and I have lots
of things because of that both genders
because of that and I I wondered how
did that happen? Dr. Peat I think I
think your well one moment caller I
think your condition is chimerism isn't
it? You are a chimera as far as I
remember I don't know I think the caller
might have hung up actually but Dr. Peat
chimeras I think they're extremely rare
in the population. You know the
embryologists have made them and you can
that's one of the early demonstrations
that mutations aren't the cause of
cancer somatic mutation theory was made
defunct 40 years ago when someone took a
cell from a tumor and stuck it in an
early embryo the tumor came from I think
it was a black hamster and they put it
in the embryo from a white hamster both
of its parents were white and the
developing organism had four parents it
was a mixture of white and black
inheritance showing that what had been a
cancer cell developed into an ordinary
part of the organism and that's the sort
of thing that on a more highly
differentiated tissue that mean abyssal
is demonstrating that it's the
environment not the genes which make a
cancer. So what do you do you have any do
you have anything to say about chimeras
in the human population and how how they
how they come about or how how yeah how
rare we know that rare. I think they're
probably not as extremely rare as one
would suppose because the the early
embryos if they happen to get too close
it's very easy for them to mix and form
one one organism. Because people can have
two two or more blood types their red
blood cells can express the the markers
for you know O positive and rhesus
rhesus groups or B that could be B
rhesus negative in the same person.
Yeah I found that quite fascinating.
Okay well let's let's move on then so
oh look out I think there's another
caller let's take this next caller
before we move on. Hi caller you're on
the air where you from? Yeah I can barely
hear you for some reason. Can you hear me?
Yeah yeah I can hear you fine but you
know yeah I can hear you fine you're
saying that you can't. Hello. Hello I can
hear you but can't yeah I can hear you.
Oh well maybe that caller should call
back in again if they've hung up yeah
okay I think this is some part of what
would hopefully get resolved. We did have
another caller who really wanted to ask
Dr. Peat something if I could use this
opportunity. He wanted to know about low
carb diets the fat-burning ketone diet
and specifically he said it's helped him
quite a bit he wants to know what Dr.
Peat thought about that the ketone diet.
Yeah what do you think of that Dr. Peat?
Um you don't produce the ketones unless
you're raising your cortisol enough to
activate the conversion of protein into
the ketones to activate the conversion
of protein into glucose at the same time
you're turning some of the fat into
ketones. So it's a pretty stressful. Yeah
and I think the problem occurs over a
few years of exposure to that increased
breakdown of protein. The cortisol is
affecting your connective tissues and
the Explorer I don't remember his name
at the moment but Arctic Explorer who
advocated the meat diet he noticed that
the Eskimos were very prematurely aged in
appearance their skin became very
wrinkled and I think that's what you
would expect from being exposed to very
high cortisol constantly. So the
ketone diet is a pretty stressful way to
do anything like lose weight and losing
weight in general is not a very good
idea unless it's done slowly especially
in people that have lots of stored
polyunsaturates in their fat makeup
which is most people unless they're
really watching what they eat and
avoiding polyunsaturates and making sure
they consume lots of saturated fats.
Actually it's a very I want to make a
very quick point here I was back in
England three weeks ago for a couple of
weeks and on my way out of the airport I
grabbed a couple of periodicals to read
while I was on the plane. I got a new
scientific and I got the Daily
Telegraph and on the cover of the new
scientist it had a picture of a frying
pan and the word FACT the C was a piece
of carbonized bacon and the F and the A
and the T of the word FACT was still
intact and it's a what you saw was fat
with a carbonized piece of bacon forming
the C but it's blackened against the
black background of the frying pan and
it said have we really got 40 years of
dietary advice wrong and it was actually
a good breath of fresh air another one
of the breaths that hopefully wake
people up enough when they get enough
these fresh breaths coming in that to
say that they were very much behind
especially dairy saturated fat and that
all saturated fat in general was very
good for you and that the polyunsaturates
and the margarines and the fish oils
actually being shown now to turn be
turned on their head and they were
actually saying yep we think we've got
40 years of dietary advice wrong so
that was good to see and then the other
sad point I did see in the Daily
Telegraph was that in England they're
now running GM crops and I when I left
England in 2001 they were actually
Europe was all GMO free so now in
England they're actually making a GMO
crop to express omega-3 oils so that
they can feed this crop to GM salmon
that are grown in the environment that
doesn't allow them to pick up the
polyunsaturate from the algae and the
microorganisms that they eat so they're
now going to feed them a GM crop
expressing omega-3s I couldn't believe
it so not too sure what's happening
folks but I know California is still on
the cutting edge I think of trying to
see sideways here with our food and
environment and everything else that's
going on so hopefully between the West
Coast and the East Coast of the States
we can keep this kind of thing going and
alive. So anyway Dr. Peat I wanted to bring
up Dr. Danopoulos' work with
urea therapy from the 80s I know I had a
caller some time ago that I got
personally who was looking for some
help and information regarding liver
cancer and I know Danopoulos had done
quite a bit of work in 1980 publishing
clinical oncology about an 11-year
experience using oral urea treatment in
liver malignancies. How much, how
familiar are you with urea as a
compound for the treatment of
carcinomas or other cancers? In the
First World War it was used as an
emergency treatment to stimulate healing
in wounds and hold down infections and
around the time 1920s I think it was
often used for inoperable cancer to
pack it with urea to it actually was
not only keeping down infection but I
think it was actually having a healing
influence and the effect of forming
lactic acid that I mentioned which
causes the pH of the cell to become
more alkaline inside that causes
swelling and swelling promotes
replication proliferation and simply an
osmotic environment which could be very
concentrated sodium chloride or urea
happens to be a very innocuous
substance it doesn't exactly have an
osmotic effect like sodium chloride
because the sodium is kept out of the
cell but the urea acts somewhat
like an osmotic dehydrator it helps to
prevent excess swelling and water
retention. You think that is one of its
main effects and that's how it's keeping
swelling down? I think so.
Okay. And the dehydrated cell becomes
more oxidatively active and catabolic
burning fuel faster where the swollen
cell is anabolic and simply growing and
dividing so many things can help to
reduce that water retention. I think
urea would work well with a good thyroid
program which helps you to retain the
normal amount of sodium chloride.
Hypothyroid people not only produce the
matrix which is over hydrated it shifts
the cells so that they produce molecules
that hold water outside of cells but the
low thyroid function lets your kidneys
lose sodium while retaining water and so
any of the osmotic therapies such as
urea I think would work nicely with
supplementing thyroid to normalize the
sodium retention.
Good. I think we have a couple of callers
on the air so I should start by taking
one of these first caller. You're on the
air caller, where are you from?
This is David Back, the caller we had
earlier who's having trouble.
Okay. Hey David, go ahead.
Hello.
Hi.
Look out. Engineering, what's going on?
I don't understand, he can hear me when I
talk to him, we can hear him.
Can you hear me now?
I can hear you.
We can hear you fine David.
Okay. So I guess I can hear you now.
Hopefully.
Are we okay?
Can you hear me David or not?
Okay, sorry about that.
He can't hear me so you're going to have
to say this I think.
Dr. Peat?
Yes.
Yes, I have, you know, and this is I guess a
little off topic but in a way it's not.
When you're describing these processes, I
mean you do it so beautifully and it
seems very complicated but are you
actually seeing images?
Like do you actually see these processes?
And I know of course a lot of this probably
has not been photographed through
microscopic techniques and different things.
So are you just in a way integrating all this
information and seeing things?
I see little models.
Not that I've seen anything exactly like it
but I have mental models for example of the
extension of the sulfhydryl groups under
the surface of a cell.
I have very concrete pictures of how that
works and so it helps me when I'm looking for
information to check against the published
research facts to have a concrete mental image.
And the reason I'm asking that question is you
were explaining like the collagen lining up and
a lot of times when I'm reading your work I find
myself trying to imagine these things and then
I'm thinking that's got to be an important part
of your process in trying to imagine since
you're a painter visual images of how this
actually might look.
Is that true?
Oh sure.
Yeah.
I've always been aware of having a map of
where I'm going and I was surprised in
graduate school when a psychology professor was
surprised at my description and I asked him
how he found his way from his home to his
office and he said go out the front door, turn
left, turn left again, turn right.
It was all a set of rules and I think some
professorial types actually think in terms
of words and rules.
Yeah, definitely.
You know and the other thing I thought about
in line with you know like almost visualization
of how this works is you know through the years
I've heard of different healers and people that
you know are more new agey kind of things where
they try to get people to imagine certain things
and then try to heal it but then I started
thinking if you were really seeing this like
you're seeing it you really could in a way be
a part of the healing process in that you're
seeing what's wrong and you're seeing what you
need to do to fix it.
Yeah, we were talking about the different
theories of what a cancer is.
The new theory it's called TOFT, tissue
organization field theory and I think that
needs another adjective, organismic.
It isn't just the local tissue organization
but it's also the way that tissue fits into
the whole organism and how the activity of the
organism keeps everything working, loading all
of its parts so that they know what they're doing.
It's very much the, and I don't want to make a
quip here, but it's very much the holistic way
of looking at it and that's what I found was
so interesting with even though it may not have
been totally accurate, Dr. Watson's comments
that we made earlier and also this kind of novel
approach to cancer treatment through the
looking at the extracellular matrix as
very much a holistic environment upon which
every cell is in communication with every
other cell.
Stem cells are arising all the time and actually
nothing is fixed.
Everything is very fluid and dynamic and very
much able to change very quickly.
Individual cells, for example, pigment cells,
you can sometimes see them migrating through the
tissue and they move at the same rate that cells
have been found to be able to crawl on a glass
slide and that at body temperature that can be
something like a centimeter and a half per day.
A very tiny cell really zips along through the
solid tissue.
Far out.
>> Thank you.
>> I think we better wrap up.
There are two callers on the air but we are not
going to be able to take them unfortunately.
It is three minutes to the top of the hour.
Once again, we have run out of time.
Let me let people know how to find out more
about you, Dr.
Peat.
Thank you for joining.
>> Thank you.
>> Once again, unfortunately, sorry for
those callers who perhaps wanted to ask
something.
I want to thank Dr.
Peat for his work.
His articles are available and freely
shared on the Internet.
His website is www.rayPeat.com.
Most of his, well, all of his articles, not
most, but all of his articles are referenced.
So it is not just his opinion, what he has
read, what he thinks.
There is lots of references to the work
that has been done, pioneering work by
people that unfortunately we don't hear
often enough that don't make the
mainstream.
But there are times when people like
Mina Bissell
and all the other people that Dr.
Peat just brings to the show
in terms of the pioneers
that have done the work
that we are talking about
very much make the contributions
that are thinking outside
the box.
It is that thinking outside the box
that really fundamentally changes
everything
from what we do to what we eat.
The whole quantum mechanics thing
is also another very exciting
field that is making
the seemingly impossible
possible.
So, yeah, go take a look
at his website.
There are lots of articles
ranging from diabetes
to saturated fats
versus polyunsaturated,
cancer,
dementia,
inflammation,
thyroid.
His specialties
are hormones,
reproductive
hormones,
and ageing hormones.
So very interesting
work.
Lots of it is very scientific
but it is also very readable.
And he has a lot of
articles that are very
interesting.
He has a lot of
articles that are very
interesting.
It is also very readable.
For those of you who have joined us
this evening, thanks so much for
listening.
Until the third Friday of next
month, we can be reached toll-free
1888 WBMERB for any questions,
regular business hours,
9 to 5.
Until September,
the third September
of next month,
good night.
(Music plays)
(soft music)
You